This exercise is gonna be a two part
exercise where
I demonstrate the usefulness of nested
functions and lexical scoping.
In the first part of the exercise we're
going to implement an
algorithm for Newton's method for finding
the square root of a number.
And we're gonna do that by creating
several functions and then
use those together to find the square root
of a number.
Then I'm gonna demonstrate how to use
nested functions to build the same result
in one function definition; where we have
multiple functions defined inside one.
So let's get started with part one of
the exercise, we're gonna call this
program chap13ex1.py.
So the first thing we need to do is import
the
math library, because we're going to use
a, function from that library.
FABS for finding the absolute value of a
number here in just a minute.
So the first thing we're going to do is
define a square function.
A very simple function that simply squares
a number.
Now we'll begin our square root
definition.
So we're gonna call it S-Q-R-T, and we
will immediately call what we're
going to term a helper function, square
root helper, with a couple of parameters.
We'll explain those here in just a minute.
Square root helper is where we do most of
the work of the function.
I'm going to explain how Newton's method
works
as I go through the definition of these
functions.
So the first thing we do is we're going to
provide a guess at what the square root of
the number is and then we're going to see
if that guess is close enough to the
actual root.
And we're going to do that by defining a
tolerance
or a threshold for how close the guess can
be.
You'll see how that works in just a
moment.
So if we're close enough on our guess then
we're
going to return the guess otherwise, we're
going to recursively call
the function again with a new guess that's
improved and
the number that we're trying to find the
square root of.
So the next thing we have to do is define
our closeEnough function, and here's where
we look at the threshold.
So, we call the absolute value function f
absolute value.
It stands for floating point absolute
value.
And to do that, we square the guess minus
the number we're looking for.
To see if that's within a tolerance or a
threshold of 0.001.
And we're saying if we're within that
difference between our guess and the
number we're trying to find the square
root of, then we've come close enough.
And so then to improve our guess.
We're going to return the average of the
guess
and the second argument x divided by the
guess.
And you'll see how that works in a minute.
And then we define average of x and y to
take the sum
of x and y divide by two which of course
is the average.
So, these are the different functions that
make up our Newton's Method algorithm,
and we can test it on a very simple square
root problem, the square root of 9.
So, let's save, then call our program.
And so there you see how close we got to
the actual value.
Let's call it up again.
Let's try a different square root.
And now let's try it again.
Okay so.
Let's bring the code back up.
Here's a set of functions that
together will implement the Newton's
Method algorithm.
So in the next part of this exercise what
we're going to do is, is
we're going to see how we can put most of
these definitions inside one function.
Using nested functions and lexical
scoping.
So that we have a more compact and
efficient function definition.
And we're going to immediately see how to
do
that here in part two which is coming up
next.